#summary Discussions concerning the further development of morphisto
#labels Phase-Requirements,Phase-Design

= Introduction =

_morphisto_ is an open-source lexicon for the morphological analysis of German. It is designed to be used with SMOR, an open-source implementation of the German morphology rules. This page is supposed to discuss questions and problems of both morphisto and SMOR which are not obvious bugs or simple feature requests.

= Open questions =

  * Prefix + Noun
    (Arbitrary)Combinations of prefix + noun are not possible in SMOR:
{{{
    Absicht<+NN>:<><Fem>:<><Nom>:<><Sg>:<>
    Aufsicht<+NN>:<><Fem>:<><Nom>:<><Sg>:<>
    Hinsicht<+NN>:<><Fem>:<><Nom>:<><Sg>:<>
}}}
    But:
{{{
    Durch<OTHER>:<>S:sicht<+NN>:<><Fem>:<><Nom>:<><Sg>:<>
    Durch<OTHER>:<>D:durch<OTHER>:<>S:sicht<+NN>:<><Fem>:<><Nom>:<><Sg>:<>
}}}

    Solution a: Add productive noun prefixation in SMOR (deko.fst).

    Solution b: Add 'ab', 'auf' etc. as 'OTHER' to morphisto.
    
*Comments by CWRSimon:*

I do like the ideas, but I am wondering, whether prefixation is productive enough for German nouns in general: E.g., Morphisto already analyzes "Durchhund" and "Durchstuhl". Of course, one could argue that only nouns with a certain semantic feature can be prefixed with a prefix that embodies the same feature (e.g. Durch[+direction] and Gang[+direction] can form Durchgang). But then again, is prefixation really a process that applies to German nouns? I don't know what the literature says, but I would imagine the following: Prefixation is process that typically applies to verbs: durchgehen, durchsehen, hingehen, absehen, etc. And Durchgang, Aufsicht, Hinsicht, etc. are just the nominalizations of theses verbs. I do concede that I don't know, how to tell an FST-based morphology about German etymological wordformation processes....


  * Verb participle to adjective conversion
    The following example shows that an adjective reading is only available for base verbs not for complex ones.
{{{
    ver<PREF>suchen<+V><1><Sg><Past><Konj>
    ver<PREF>suchen<+V><1><Sg><Past><Ind>
    ver<PREF>suchen<+V><3><Sg><Past><Konj>
    ver<PREF>suchen<+V><3><Sg><Past><Ind>
    versuchen<+V><1><Sg><Past><Konj>
    versuchen<+V><1><Sg><Past><Ind>
    versuchen<+V><3><Sg><Past><Konj>
    versuchen<+V><3><Sg><Past><Ind>
    versuchen<V><PPast><SUFF><+ADJ><Pos><Masc><Nom><Sg><Sw>
    versuchen<V><PPast><SUFF><+ADJ><Pos><Fem><Nom><Sg>
    versuchen<V><PPast><SUFF><+ADJ><Pos><Fem><Akk><Sg>
    versuchen<V><PPast><SUFF><+ADJ><Pos><Neut><Nom><Sg><Sw>
    versuchen<V><PPast><SUFF><+ADJ><Pos><Neut><Akk><Sg><Sw>
    versuchen<V><PPast><SUFF><+ADJ><Pos><NoGend><Nom><Pl><St>
    versuchen<V><PPast><SUFF><+ADJ><Pos><NoGend><Akk><Pl><St>
}}}
    For the (in principle superflous) full form entry of 'versuchen' but not for the derived form 'ver + suchen', adjective readings are generated. Assumedly, this is also a problem in 'deko.fst'.

*Comments by CWRSimon*
What exact wordform have you analyzed? _versuchen_ is not exactly a hypothetic attributive adjective form, only maybe a predicative one ("Dieses Angebot ist versuchen."). If one makes Morphisto analyze _versuchendes_, one will receive the analysis for an attributive adjective:
{{{
versuchen<V><PPres><SUFF><+ADJ><Pos><Neut><Akk><Sg><St/Mix>
versuchen<V><PPres><SUFF><+ADJ><Pos><Neut><Nom><Sg><St/Mix>
ver<PREF>suchen<V><PPres><SUFF><+ADJ><Pos><Neut><Akk><Sg><St/Mix>
ver<PREF>suchen<V><PPres><SUFF><+ADJ><Pos><Neut><Nom><Sg><St/Mix>
}}}
But I agree that the internal workings of deko.fst are not very transparent and need to be examined in detail!

  * Relation between Base- and KomposStem
    Despite of defining a KomposStem for a base entry, it is still possible to infer compounds from that base.
{{{
    Alter<NN>:<>W:weisheit<+NN>:<><Fem>:<><Nom>:<><Sg>:<>
}}}
    Should we define a special origin class for words which have a KomposStem and should not be used in compounds?
{{{
    <BaseStem><Lemma>Alter</Lemma><Stem>Alter</Stem><Pos>NN</Pos><Origin>special</Origin><InfClass>NNeut_s_0</InfClass> <Frequency>10</Frequency> </BaseStem>
    <KomposStem><Upper>Alter</Upper><Lower>Alters</Lower><Pos>NN</Pos><Origin>nativ</Origin><Frequency>0</Frequency</KomposStem>
}}}
    Is there an equivalent type of entry for derivations (e.g. DerivStem)?